Zero to Cloud-Native with IBM Cloud
===================================
**Kevin Collins ( kevincollins@us.ibm.com )**  
**Kunal Malhotra ( kunal.malhotra3@ibm.com )**

Part 5: IBM Cloud Databases Provisioning and Configuration
==========================================================


1 - IBM Cloud Databases
=======================

### 1 - 1 Introduction

Developing cloud native applications vs traditional applications is very
different from a data perspective. In a traditional monolith
application, it is very common to have one large SQL based database.
Cloud native architecture on the other hand encourages multiple
purpose-built databases. A best practice while developing cloud native
application is isolating the data where each microservice manages its
own data.

While you grow your application architecture and have a large number of
independent databases, following good 12-factor app design, and also
have a wide variety of databases, it's a lot to manage. There are a
number of database types you may want to leverage from Redis as a
caching database, to a high-performance document database like Cloudant,
a general purpose SQL database like PostgreSQL, or maybe a high
performance key value store database like etcd. This is one of the great
parts of moving to cloud-native in being able to select the best
database type for your service. You are not stuck to just one database
like we typically see with a monolith. But how are you going to learn
how to support, scale and secure each database.

Enter IBM Cloud Databases. IBM Cloud Databases supports a wide range of
databases that are managed for you.

![](.//media/image1.png)

This means that IBM takes care of all the hard parts of provisioning,
supporting and maintaining different databases. IBM takes care of
monitoring, backing up, making the database highly available, providing
all the hardware and networking, and on top of that secures your
databases. Another major benefit is these databases are provisioned in
minutes. Providing all of these database services allows you to try out
different databases to see which one best meets your application
architecture. It's better to fail fast by developing say a quick MVP
using MongoDB and being able to switch quickly to say a Cloudant
database with minimal investment.

2 - Tutorial -- IBM Cloud Databases
---------------------------------

Referring back to our application architecture of our tutorial
application, we will be deploying two database / messaging services (
Redis and RabbitMQ ) that are part of IBM Cloud Databases.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image2.png)

### 

You can read more about IBM Cloud Databases for Redis here:

<https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/databases-for-redis?topic=databases-for-redis-getting-started>

and Messages for RabbitMQ here:

<https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/messages-for-rabbitmq?topic=messages-for-rabbitmq-getting-started>

### 2 - 1 Tutorial -- IBM Cloud Databases for Redis

In the zero-to-cloud-native application we are going to develop and
deploy, we are going to leverage caching to return data very quickly to
the frontend. One of the most common use cases for using caching is to
decrease data access latency. This is very important for frontend
applications that may need to pull data to display in a user interface.

For this tutorial, we are going to simulate a long running task where we
will replace the long running task with a cache using IBM Cloud
Databases for Redis. We are going to do this through calling an API
provided by IBM Cloud that retrieves a list of managed OpenShift
versions. You can read and try the API here:

<https://containers.cloud.ibm.com/global/swagger-global-api/#/beta/v2GetVersions>

While this API does not take that long to run you will be able to
understand how to implement caching for those long running APIs or
database calls.

Before we can deploy our code, which as you will see leverages Redis, we
need to deploy an instance that will store versions of IBM Cloud Managed
OpenShift.

Before provisioning IBM Cloud Databases for Redis, we will need to
authorize the service to access the Key Protect instance that you
created in part 3. You will need to provide this authorization before
provisioning the IBM Cloud Databases for Redis instance.

We will follow that same steps that we did in part 3, in authorizing
Cloud Internet Services to access Certificate Manager.

1.  Navigate to **IBM Cloud \> Manage \> Access (IAM) \>
    Authorizations**.

2.  Click **Create** and assign a source and target service. The source
    service is granted access to the target service based on the roles
    that you set in the next step.

    -   Source: IBM Cloud Databases for Redis

    -   Target: Key Protect

3.  Specify a service instance for both the source and the target.

4.  Assign the **Reader** role to allow IBM Cloud Databases for Redis to
    access the Key Protect. Then, click **Authorize**.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image3.png)

You will notice that I selected all instances in my account for Database
for Redis to a specific instance of Key Protect. The reason for this is
because I may want to create multiple Redis databases that I want to use
Key Protect to encrypt the data, and don't want to have to go in and
provide this authorization for each Redis database I create. If you do
want to be more granular with your authorizations then you certain can
and have that option.

Going back to the IBM Cloud Catalog, search for Redis, and click the
Databases for Redis tile.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image4.png)

You will notice that there are several Redis options. If you want to
manage, scale and secure Redis yourself you can install it directly in
your cluster. For the reasons mentioned in the introduction, we will be
using the managed version of Redis named IBM Cloud Databases for Redis.

The first thing I'm going to select is Dallas for the region. I want the
Redis instance to be in the same geographic area as my cluster for best
performance.

Next, we need to give the Redis instance a name. Best practice is to
have a Redis instance for each service that will leverage it. I will
name it Databases for Redis-zero-to-cloud-native-versions which I can
tell which application and service of the application that this instance
of Redis will be used for.

I'll change the resource group to the zero-to-cloud-native resource
group I've been using for all my IBM Cloud services.

The last thing I'm going to change is that I want the service to
leverage the Key Protect instance that we created in part 3, to use the
key I created and stored in Key Protect to encrypt data in the Redis
database.

After entering all these settings, click create.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image5.png)

After clicking create, your database will be ready to use in a few
minutes. This is why I strongly recommend using IBM Cloud Databases to
manage and provision your cloud native databases, it doesn't get easier
than this to setup and configure.

### 2 - 2 Tutorial -- IBM Cloud Messages for RabbitMQ

We will be using RabbitMQ as the messaging layer in-between
microservices. Just like with Redis, I don't want to have to worry about
how I'm going to provision, scale and secure RabbitMQ. I want IBM Cloud
to do all the hard work for me, so I'm going to leverage IBM Cloud
Messages for RabbitMQ managed service.

Just like we did the Redis, before provisioning IBM Cloud Messages for
RabbitMQ, we will need to authorize the service to access our Key
Protect instance that we created in part 3. You will need provide this
authorization before provisioning the IBM Cloud Messages for RabbitMQ
instance.

We will follow that same steps that we did above with Redis.

1.  Navigate to **IBM Cloud \> Manage \> Access (IAM) \>
    Authorizations**.

2.  Click **Create** and assign a source and target service. The source
    service is granted access to the target service based on the roles
    that you set in the next step.

-   Source: Messages for RabbitMQ

-   Target: Key Protect

3.  Specify a service instance for both the source and the target.

4.  Assign the **Reader** role to allow IBM Cloud Messages for RabbitMQ
    to access the Key Protect.

5.  Then, click **Authorize**.

This time, I'm going to give Messages for RabbitMQ authorization for
every Key Protect service in the zero-to-cloud-native resource group so
you can see different granularity options.

Now that we have authorized Messages for RabbitMQ with Key Protect we
can provision our RabbitMQ service. To get started, go to the IBM Cloud
Catalog, search for RabbitMQ, and then click on the Messages for
RabbitMQ tile. Just like you saw this Redis, IBM Cloud offers different
RabbitMQ services from do it yourself to a managed service with IBM
Cloud Databases Messages for RabbitMQ.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image6.png)

To create your Messages for Rabbit MQ instance you need to select a
region. Like we have with all our other services we want to choose
Dallas so all of our services are in the same geographic region.

Next, give you service a meaningful name such as Messages for
RabbitMQ-zero-to-cloud-native.

Select the zero-to-cloud-native resource group.

To leverage our Key Protect instance we create earlier, select the
zero-to-cloud-native Key Protect instance along with the encryption key
we created in step 3.

After entering all of these settings, click Create.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image7.png)

Just like the provisioning of Cloud Databases for Redis, that is all you
have to do. Messages for RabbitMQ will be available in a couple of
minutes.

Now that we have created all the various IBM Cloud services our
application will be using, we can now start looking at the microservices
code. However, before going through the code, \\you need to have a
development environment setup including a command line environment with
various CLIs installed and configured, a development IDE, and other
various tools that will make your cloud-native development life easier.
