Zero to Cloud-Native with IBM Cloud
===================================
**Kevin Collins ( kevincollins@us.ibm.com )**  
**Kunal Malhotra ( kunal.malhotra3@ibm.com )**

Part 4: OpenShift Provisioning and Configuration
================================================

1 IBM Cloud Managed OpenShift
=============================

1 - 1 Introduction
-----------------

In this tutorial, we will use IBM Cloud's Managed OpenShift service to
run our cloud-native application. Red Hat OpenShift on IBM Cloud is a
managed offering to create your own OpenShift cluster of compute hosts
to deploy and manage containerized apps on IBM Cloud. Red Hat OpenShift
on IBM Cloud provides intelligent scheduling, self-healing, horizontal
scaling, service discovery and load balancing, automated rollouts and
rollbacks, and secret and configuration management for your apps.
Combined with an intuitive user experience, built-in security and
isolation, and advanced tools to secure, manage, and monitor your
cluster workloads, you can rapidly deliver highly available and secure
containerized apps in the public cloud.

You can read more about RedHat OpenShift on IBM Cloud here:

<https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/openshift?topic=openshift-roks-overview>

We will be creating a multizone cluster in this tutorial. If you prefer
a single zone cluster then the same tutorial steps will work.

Why do we need a multizone cluster? In a multizone cluster, the worker
nodes in your worker pools are replicated across multiple zones within
one region. Multizone clusters are designed to evenly schedule pods
across worker nodes and zones to assure availability and failure
recovery. If worker nodes are not spread evenly across the zones or
capacity is insufficient in one of the zones, the Kubernetes scheduler
or OpenShift controller might fail to schedule all requested pods.

For this tutorial, from an availability perspective, a multizone cluster
is not really needed. I've decided to use a multizone cluster of this
tutorial to show the value and ease of using a multizone cluster that
you would typically see in a production environment.

## 1 - 2 Preparing for Your Cluster

Before provisioning your cluster, you need to consider which network
infrastructure you want to use from a Virtual Private Cloud to Classic
Infrastructure. As we went through in Part 2 -- we will be deploying our
cluster in the Virtual Private Cloud we already created to give our
application an additional layer of security from a networking
perspective.

### 1 - 2 - 1 Cloud Object Storage

For a cluster provisioned on a virtual private cloud, the internal image
registry is backed by IBM Cloud Object Storage. If you don't already
have a Cloud Object Storage instance that would like to use, you will
need to create one. To do so, click on the IBM Cloud Catalog, search for
Object Storage and click the IBM Cloud Object Storage tile.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image1.png)

You can read more about Cloud Object Storage here:

<https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-object-storage?topic=cloud-object-storage-getting-started-cloud-object-storage>

As we have done with all the other IBM Cloud services we have created,
you will need to give the Cloud Object Storage instance a name and
specify the resource group it will be in.

For this tutorial I will use the following settings:

**Plan:** Standard

**Service Name:** Cloud Object Storage-zero-to-cloud-native

**Resource Group:** zero-to-cloud-native

After entering your settings for Cloud Object Storage, click Create.

## 1 - 3 Provisioning RedHat OpenShift on IBM Cloud

To provision an OpenShift cluster, click on the IBM Cloud Catalog,
search for OpenShift and then click on the Red Hat OpenShift on IBM
Cloud tile.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image2.png)

The first thing we need to do is to specify a version for our OpenShift
Cluster. I'm going to select the latest supported version in IBM Cloud
which is version 4.4.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image3.png)

Next, you need to provide an OCP entitlement for the OCP license. If you
had bought a CloudPak from IBM, I could apply that OCP license to this
cluster. As CloudPaks are out of scope for this tutorial, I will leave
the default value Purchase additional licenses for this worker pool.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image4.png)

We then need to specify the infrastructure to use with our cluster. As
we have been through, we will be deploying our cluster on a virtual
private cloud that we already created. I will select the
zero-to-cloud-native VPC I created in part 3 of this tutorial and will
also select the instance of Cloud Object Storage for the internal
registry for my cluster. The service will automatically create a bucket
for your cluster's internal registry using the Cloud Object Storage
instance you select.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image5.png)

Next, we specify the location where we want to deploy our cluster to.
For the resource group name, I will select the resource group we have
been using zero-to-cloud-native. For the datacenters, I will keep all
three data centers that I created in my VPC selected. Distributing your
workload across three zones ensures high availability for your app in
case one or two zones are not available. By having your worker nodes
spread evenly across all three availability zones gives you an industry
leading 99.99% SLA for your OpenShift Cluster.

Next, I setup my default worker pool. A worker pool is a grouping of
worker nodes that are all the same flavor or t-shirt size for workers in
that pool. Worker nodes pools allow us to do things like autoscaling.
When the deployed worker nodes reach capacity and we can't schedule any
more workload to the nodes, additional worker nodes of the same flavor
can be added automatically with autoscaling. This is fully customizable
with minimum and maximums.

By default, we deploy with 4 x 16 worker nodes which is 4 virtual cpus
and 16 gigs of memory. For this tutorial that will be more than enough.
I'm going to keep the worker node count as 3 per zone. This tutorial
only requires 1 worker node, but in future tutorials I will show
resiliency features of IBM Cloud Managed OpenShift by having multiple
workers in multiple zones.

There are three choices of compute within our managed OpenShift service.
The first is called shared compute. Shared compute has a single tenant
virtual machine and a multi-tenant hypervisor and hardware underneath
it. This is your typical 'cloud' virtual machine.

Then, we have dedicated compute. This means you have a single tenant
virtual machine, hypervisor and hardware. In this case, you are the only
tenant running on a physical server running in IBM Cloud. You may have
multiple virtual machines running on that server, but you don't have to
worry about your competitor or noisy neighbors because you own that full
box.

The last option is bare metal. If you need to guarantee a certain amount
of resources for your application, perhaps you need GPUs, compute
isolation, or eliminating the hypervisor you can get a bare metal server
as part of IBM's managed service for OpenShift.

For this tutorial, I'm going to go with Shared Virtual.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image6.png)

Finally, I need to give my cluster a name. I'm going to name my cluster
zero-to-cloud-native and then click Create.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image7.png)

This will start provisioning your cluster and you can start using it in
about 15 minutes. Next up, we will setup the cloud databases we will be
using and our messaging platform.
