Zero to Cloud-Native with IBM Cloud
===================================

**Kevin Collins ( kevincollins@us.ibm.com )**  

Part 8: Tutorial Application Code Base 
======================================

1 - Codebase Overview
---------------------

All the code for the zero-to-cloud-native tutorial is stored in GitHub.
As with good microservice design, each microservice has its own git
repository to keep microservice independence and as you will see will
also assist in deploying the microservices with a Continuous Integration
/ Continuous Delivery ( CICD ) pipeline.

With the zero-to-cloud-native application, you will be developing an API
and Web based application that will provide a framework to create APIs
to perform common tasks on IBM Cloud and even automate common tasks.
With this tutorial, we will be implementing three API calls:

1)  Retrieve an OpenShift login token and login URL.

2)  Retrieve a list of supported OpenShift versions on IBM Cloud.

3)  Enable worker nodes so you can SSH into the worker nodes.

There are six microservices and seven GitHub code repositories that make
up the zero-to-cloud-native application.

1)  **API Frontend** -- Python flask based microservice that serves as
    the frontend for calling the three APIs.

> <https://github.com/kmcolli/api-frontend-02cn>

2)  **Web Frontend** -- Web based frontend for invoking the APIs.

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/web-frontend-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/web-frontend-02cn)

3)  **Utility** -- a utility microservice that performs common tasks
    that many of the other microservices use.

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/utility-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/utility-02cn)

4)  **Enable SSH** -- enables SSH on IBM Cloud Managed OpenShift Worker
    Nodes

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/enable-node-SSH-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/enable-node-SSH-02cn)

5)  **OCP Realtime** -- 'realtime' APIs that will return an OpenShift
    login token and a list of currently supported OpenShift versions.

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/ocp-realtime-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/ocp-realtime-02cn)

6)  **Load OCP Versions** -- cronjob implementation that will retrieve a
    list of supported versions of IBM Cloud Managed OpenShift versions
    and store the results in Redis for quick access.

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/load-OCP-versions-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/load-OCP-versions-02cn)

7)  **Secrets** -- secrets template yaml file. The zero-to-cloud-native
    application will require that a number of Kubernetes secrets are
    set. This template file will need to updated with parameters for
    your environment.

> [[https://github.com/kmcolli/secrets-02cn]{.ul}](https://github.com/kmcolli/secrets-02cn)

2 - Setting up GitHub
---------------------

Before you can build and deploy the code, you will need to clone the
above repositories and with the exception of the Secrets repo, add them
to your GitHub account. The first thing you will want to do is clone
each code repository listed above.

### 2 - 1 Clone Zero to Cloud Native Repository

Using your command line, navigate to where you want to store your code.
Create a directory such as zero-to-cloud-native and then switch to the
directory.

mkdir zero-to-cloud-native

cd zero-to-cloud-native

While under the directory you just created, you will need to clone each
code repository.

Example using the command line:

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/api-frontend-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/web-frontend-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/utility-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/enable-node-SSH-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/ocp-realtime-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/load-OCP-versions-02cn>

git clone <https://github.com/kmcolli/secrets-02cn>

### 2 - 2 Add the cloned repositories into your own GitHub account.

To enable automatic deployment using CI/CD toolchains, you will need to
add the repositories you just cloned to your GitHub account. Using
**api-frontend-02cn** as example, you will first need to create a new
repository on GitHub.

After logging into GitHub, click on New under repositories.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image1.png)

On the next string, enter a name for your repository, you can keep the
name the same **api-frontend-02cn**, by default I keep the repository
Private, and then click Create repository.

![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](.//media/image2.png)

As I previously mentioned, I have a personal battle with the GitHub CLI
so I have resulted in using GitHub Desktop. After creating the
repository on the GitHub website, the next screen will allow you to
click Set up in Desktop.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image3.png)

This will add the new repository to your GitHub Desktop application.

Repeat the same process for all other repositories.

### 2 - 3 Git Branches

A best practice that I like to follow is having a unique git branch for
each Git repository for each environment. For example, if you have three
environments, Dev, Staging and Production, you would have three branches
in GitHub -- Dev, Staging, and Production. In this tutorial, we will be
simulating the dev environment for our CI/CD pipelines which means we
need a dev branch for our Git Repository.

To create a new branch using GitHub Desktop, change the repository to
the one you want to create a new branch.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image4.png)

On the next screen, simply type in the name of the branch you want to
create, in our case dev. Note that when you create a new branch, all the
files from the master branch will automatically be copied over to the
new branch.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image5.png)

### 2 - 4 Copy the Cloned Source Code to your New Repository

Now that you have created a new repository and have already cloned the
existing source code, you need to copy the code you cloned to the github
repository directory that you just created.

Source:
In section 2-1, you created a directory called zero-to-cloud-native where you cloned each repository. For each repository, copy all the source code to your corresponding git repository.

**Note:** By default, your git repository will be located at:
Documents/GitHub/\<repository name\>

After copying the source code to your git repository, go back to GitHub
Desktop. In GitHub desktop, select the repository name, enter a summary
such as 'Initial' and click **Commit to dev**

Note: make sure you have selected the dev branch.

Finally, on the right-hand side of the page, click **Publish Branch**.

Repeat all the steps in this section ( 2-3 ) for every repository.

3 - Setting up Visual Studio Code
---------------------------------

Now that you have cloned each Git repository and created your own
repository, the next step is to import the code into your IDE. For this
tutorial, I will be using Visual Studio Code.

One of the nice features of Visual Studio code is the concept of
workspaces. Workspaces allow you to group different folders together
that make up an application. In this tutorial, we will be creating a
zero-to-cloud-native workspace.

After starting Visual Studio Code, click on File and then select Add
Folder to Workspace. Select all seven code repositories.

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](.//media/image6.png)

After you have imported all the folders, you should see the following:

![A screenshot of text Description automatically
generated](.//media/image7.png)

Note that you will see that I have two folders for secrets. One is
secrets-02cn which is the secrets template that I am syncing with GitHub
that you cloned. I also have a private secrets folder, which stores
private secrets such as my IBM Cloud API Key that I am keeping local or
storing in a private GitHub Repository. Navigate to your filesystem and
directory where you are storing all source code. Create a new directory
called private-secrets. Copy the file zero-to-cloud-native-secrets file
that is under the secrets-02cn directly to the newly created
private-secrets directory. You will be editing this file in the next
section.

4 - Code Layout
---------------

Now that we have Visual Studio Code setup for the zero to cloud native
tutorial, you can start exploring the code.

Each repository has the same folder layout. You will see the following
folder structure:

-   **app** -- contains the application source code.

-   **deployments** -- contains Kubernetes deployment files

-   **pipeline** -- contains 'Classic' pipeline configuration scripts --
    used for our classic CI/CD toolchain

-   **.tekton** -- contains 'Tekton' pipeline configuration scripts --
    used for our Tekton CI/CD toolchains.

-   **Dockerfile** -- Dockerfile used to build the image for the
    microservice configuration -- Python requirements file

-   **.dockerignore** -- file that tells docker which files to ignore
    while building an image

Now that we have setup and configured all the services for the tutorial
application and imported the source code into our development
environment, we can finally deploy the application! The next section
will go through deploying the application.
